If the Inca monarchy recalls the great empires of Asia, China, and
Assyria, Mexico, on the other hand, appears to have been a feudal
kingdom in which _caciques_, governors of vast provinces, ruled
beside the absolute monarch.  "There is no general overlord,"
observed Cortez.  There was a central authority, as in Peru, but the
Mexican despotism was more rude and barbarous than that of the Incas;
the blood of human victims dripped from its smoking altars.  The
social organism had not reached the degree of perfection attained by
the Inca monarchy.

The Spanish and Portuguese conquerors, with their mediæval ideas,
their African fanaticism, their marvellous ships, and their powerful
weapons, terrified these peoples who were still dwelling in the age
of bronze and polished stone.  Historians report the surprise of
these hungry adventurers before the treasures of Mexico and Peru.
Atahualpa offered to fill with gold the chamber in which Pizarro held
{48} him prisoner.  The court of Montezuma displayed an Asiatic
luxury: surrounded with women, buffoons, idols, and strange birds,
under a resplendent canopy loaded with gold and jewels, the Aztec
monarch advances like a king in an Oriental tale.  His escort is of
haughty princes.  The imperial city abounds in temples, lakes, and
causeways; it is melancholy and sumptuous, the capital of Mexico.
The chroniclers of the time tell us how the cupidity of the
_conquistadors_ was awakened: men who had left a ruined Spain to find
these immense treasures in America; they are writing for impoverished
hidalgos, and fear that they will not be believed when they speak of
this fabulous abundance of gold.  Since the days of Ophir and the
Queen of Sheba, says one of these historians, "no ancient writing had
ever stated that gold, silver, and jewels" had ever been discovered
in such vast quantities as those which Castile was about to receive
from her new colonies.

The soldiers of the conquest pillaged these treasures, sacked temples
and palaces, and quarrelled over their wealth in a series of tragic
struggles.  Around the mines cities sprang up and parties were
formed; at Potosi Vicuñas and Biscayans, excited by the sight of the
metal which delighted their cupidity, prolonged the savagery of the
first conflict.  Where minerals existed the colonial life was
unstable, harsh, and brutal; in poor countries, such as Chili and the
Argentine, societies were slowly formed which cultivated the soil:
tenacious oligarchies bound to the new country by solid interests.

The vanquished races and the victors differed greatly from one
another; hence amidst the political and moral unity of the new
societies arose different characteristics and incipient antagonisms.
Spaniards and Portuguese took Indian wives or women; the leaders
married princesses of Mexico and Peru; the soldiers founded
provisional homes in the colonies.  {49} The Andalusians settled in
the tropics; the Basques in the temperate regions; and the Castilians
swarmed in the towns.  A curious affinity of race, as between the
Basques and the Araucanians, and analogies of climate and landscape,
and, apart from these factors, the erratic wanderings of the
conquerors, explain this original diversity of the American
provinces.  Why should they be similar: the offspring of the gentle
Indian Quechuas and the fiery Andalusians; the children of the virile
Araucanians and the calm, reasonable Basques?  Wherever the native
population was more abundant, and the political organisation more
complicated, as in Mexico and Peru, its influence on miscegenation
was more potent than in colonies from which the Indian was
disappearing (as the Charruas of Uruguay or the nomadic tribes of
Brazil) before the onset of civilisation.  The climate, severe on the
plateaux, and favourable to an energetic existence, warm and
enervating on the coast, contributed to the variety of human types.
The first families sprung of the sensuality of the conquerors already
revealed the elements of future developments.

It was an age of creation: races and cities, new rites and customs;
all were sprung of the crossing of Iberian and Indian.  The diversity
of the elements whose fusion was paving the way for a new caste gave
mankind an interesting variety.  The negro, imported by the Spaniard
for the cultivation of the tropical soil, added yet another
complication to the first admixture of castes.  Grotesque generations
with every shade of complexion and every conformation of skull were
born in America from the unions stimulated by the kings of Spain.  In
the Anglo-Saxon provinces of North America the climate only changed
the invaders; in the Iberian colonies the conquered race, the land
itself, the air they breathed, all modified the conquerors.
Creation, the synthesis of human elements, action and reaction
between the country and {50} the men who ruled it, a crucible
continually agitated by unheard-of fusions of races; all this gave
the process of evolution the intensity and the aspect of a continual
conflict.  From the negro _bozal_ recently imported from Africa to
the _quinteron_, the offspring of slaves purified by successive
unions with the whites; from the Indian who mourned his monotonous
servitude in the solitude of the mountains, to the coloured student
of the universities, we find, in the seventeenth century as in the
twentieth, in the colonies as in the republics, every variety of this
admixture of Iberians, Indians, and Africans.  From a social point of
view the rank of the individual corresponded generally with the shade
of his epidermis.  "In America," wrote Humboldt at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, "the more or less white skin determines the
position which a man holds in society."

The Spaniard degenerated in the colonies.  The passage from a period
of violence to one of conventual quietude betrayed this slow
decadence of the invader, under the pressure of the climate and in
contact with the conquered races.  The Creole, the Spaniard born in
America, has lost the prickly characteristics of the hidalgo: the
proud individualism, the love of bloody adventure, the stoicism, the
tenacity in resistance and conflict, and the rigidity of faith.

In flexibility, brilliance, and grace he has surpassed the rude
Iberian; but his effort is transitory, his will weak; his hatred is
as ephemeral as his love.  The new race produces neither mystics nor
men of action, but poets, orators, admirable intriguers, superficial
scholars, brilliant commentators of exotic ideas; from the
seventeenth century onwards they succeed to the first generation of
audacious colonists, heroic monks, and warlike captains.

To extend the domains of the monarch, to "cause the Indians to live
in the knowledge of our Catholic {51} faith," they conquered America,
and they brought to the New World a religion, a political _régime_,
universities, an economic system--all the elements, in short, of a
traditional civilisation.  Absolutism in government, monopoly in
matters of commerce and finance, intolerance in questions of dogma
and morality, tutelage and rigorous isolation; these were the
foundations of Spanish colonisation.  The methods practised by the
Dutch and the English in their colonies were not essentially
different.  Toqueville and Boutmy have studied the effects, in the
United States, of Calvinistic intolerance and commercial monopoly.
They have remarked upon the slavery of negroes in the agricultural
districts of Virginia, and the cupidity of the emigrants who pursued
the Indians with a truly Puritan ardour.

The viceroy, the representative of the monarch, exercised full powers
of government in the colonies.  He presided over the _Real
Audiencia_, the king's tribunal, was superintendent of finances,
protector of the Church, and chief of the army.  To him all power was
subordinate, whether ecclesiastical, military, or civil.  A luxurious
court surrounded him, the flattery of courtiers intoxicated him, and
subornation had its way with him.  Sometimes the viceroys represented
the real aspirations of the colonists, and were serious legislators,
such as Francisco de Toledo, in Peru; or they defended the colonists
from the expeditions of filibusters with such energy that their
fiercely contested battles evoked the sentiment of nationality.  At
other times they enriched themselves by the sale of posts, and
drained the treasury, or passed in progress through the cities of
their state, haughty overlords surrounded with luxury and gold.

To her political despotism corresponds the commercial monopoly which
Spain established in her dominions.  Humboldt defined the ancient
ideal of {52} the colonising races in his "Essay on the Government of
New Spain": "For centuries a colony was regarded as useful to the
metropolis only inasmuch as it furnished a great number of raw
materials and consumed plenty of goods and merchandise, which were
borne by the vessels of the mother-country."[1]  England, Holland,
Spain, and Portugal acted upon the same exclusivist principles; the
ordinances of Cromwell were as inflexible on this point as the
schedules of Philip II.  Commercial liberty and industrial
competition were condemned on the same grounds as rebellion and
heresy.

Politics and economics were subordinated to religion; the third
combined the absolutism of the first and the monopoly of the second.
The conquest of America was apostolic.  The Spanish captains fought
to convert the overseas infidels.  The imperialism of Charles V. and
Philip II. had a religious character.  To preserve the colonies from
heresy it closed the ports, prohibited all traffic with foreigners,
and imposed a conventual seclusion upon a whole world.  The Church
was the centre of colonial life.  She governed in the spiritual
order; imposed punishments, flagellations, exile, and
excommunication, and delivered unbelievers and sorcerers to the
purifying care of the Inquisition.  In the department of morals she
kept a watchful eye upon the people; she defended the Indians, and
often opposed the governors.  Viceroy and _cacique_ feared her
equally.  A formidable moral power, she helped to discipline the
unruly Creoles, to unite classes and races, and to form nations.  The
cities were adorned by her chapels and convents, and to these
convents, in pious mood, the hidalgos often left all their
possessions.

Thus property became a monopoly of the convents.  Hence a plethora of
monks and nuns, and the {53} accumulation, in Mexico and at Lima, of
enormous wealth.  In Peru the annual income of the archbishop
amounted to £8,000, and that of some bishops to £4,000.  What with
bishops and viceroys there was no lack of luxury.  A pompous and
sensual Catholicism satisfied the imagination of the Creoles, the
superstitious fears of the Indians, and the cheerful materialism of
the negroes.  The Aztec, the _quechua_, accepted from the monks a
strange, Byzantine dogma, mingled with aristocratic ideals and
Oriental mysteries.  The native soon confounded the two mythologies.
In Mexico, so Humboldt reported, "the Holy Ghost is the sacred eagle
of the Aztecs."  Novel and sumptuous rites were added to the
traditional religion.  Processions and festivals, a kind of continual
religious fair, united all races.  The people loved the cult of
religion, with its external manifestations, its virgins loaded with
heavy _ex-votos_, its sorrowing Christs, its gorgeously-decked
saints, and the glitter of gold and silk.

As confessor the priest influenced the family and directed the
education of children; as preacher he condemned immorality and judged
the governors.  As in Byzantium, as in the Florence of Savonarola,
the colonial monk, speaking in the name of the exploited populace,
was an austere professor of virtue.  The Creole admired his
ecclesiastical learning, and his invincible attitude before the
powers of this world; in him the Indian found a protector.

The American colonies differed in social composition.  The negro
abounded in Peru and Cuba, but soon disappeared in Chili and the
Argentine.  The poverty of Araucania contrasted with the opulence of
Caracas, Lima, and Mexico.  In the Aztec capital some territorial
seigneurs drew forty thousand a year sterling in revenues.  Frezier
valued the jewels of a rich lady of Lima at 240,000 livres of silver.
The melancholy Sierra, peopled by Indians, contrasted {54} with the
life of the coast, where luxurious cities attracted the traveller.
In the cities of the interior, Cordoba or Charcas, we find settled
traditions, tenacity, and sobriety, but in the capitals of the coast
all is luxury, instability, and licence.

Spain tended to destroy this variety by uniform laws.[2]  Originality
was as odious to her as heresy.  Customs and beliefs, hierarchies and
privileges, all must be uniform.  Under such a _régime_ the life of
the colonies was dull and monotonous.  The cities slumbered, lulled
by the murmur of prayers and fountains.  Idleness was the natural
condition of the Creole; lengthy meals and daily siestas limited his
inconsiderable activities.  The empty streets and squares knew hours
of silence; rejoicings were ordered, and the orders pasted on the
hoardings; gaiety itself was imposed.  It seemed as though time
itself must stand still in these cities of parallel streets; that the
ideal of all men must be absolute quietude.

The hidalgo of noble origin, the owner of vast domains, governed his
sons and his slaves with the severity of a Roman patrician.  He could
be neither merchant nor manufacturer; commerce and industry were "low
callings."  He was attracted rather by the bar, the subtleties of the
"doctors," the scholarship and poetry of the courts.  Whether at the
university or the _cabildo_ (municipality), his life would be the
same.  He would sing the glory of viceroys in Gongoric rhymes, or
commentate upon Duns Scotus, or meticulously construct acrostics or
syllogisms.  In the café, at social gatherings, in the literary
salons, he would whisper criticisms of the governors and the bishops,
or discuss the titles to nobility of a marquis of recent creation, or
the purity {55} of blood of an enriched mulatto.  A conventual
chapter, or the quarrel of a bishop and a viceroy, or a bull-fight,
would fill him with ecstasy.  Attending mass in the morning, and in
the evening driving through the stately streets in a luxurious
_calèche_, the proud caballero would bear himself majestically.  At
night, in his gloomy house, he would find his wife telling her beads,
surrounded by docile slaves.

Sensuality and mysticism were the pleasures of the colonists.  The
convents themselves, despite their high walls, were not able to shut
out these violent delights.  Licentious monks, nuns with lovers,
sprightly abbés, figure in the chronicles of the period as in the
Italian _contes_.  The cloister, with its rich arabesques, the
_patio_ (courtyard) perfumed with orange-blossom, the murmuring jet
of the fountain: these evoke the passion of Andalusia.  A devout
society pays the insatiable convents a tribute of gold and virgins;
and love, fleeing the dead cities, takes refuge in cells quick with
ambition and unruly desires.

The woman, guarded in the Oriental fashion, in houses strong as
fortresses, attracts society to her salon by her Parisian grace; in a
world of ponderous scholars she is famous for her amenity and
subtlety.  Her fidelity, for the hidalgo, is a question of his
honour.  The husband revenges himself for transgressions by terrible
punishments, as in the Calderonian drama, while the heroic lover
brings his exasperated desires to the Moorish balcony, where he
awaits his lady in torment.  Away from home, a host of illegitimate
unions, of concubines, of clandestine amours.

Passion will be tragic and devotion voluptuous; in place of mystics
we shall find _illuminés_.  The devil is the essential personage of
this religion of minutiæ; thanks to him the dreary colonial life is
surrounded by mystery; his appearances and his manoeuvres thrill the
Creole's blood.  Hobgoblins, {56} sorcerers, spells, thefts of the
consecrated host, and exorcisms occupy the Inquisition; tales of
incubi and succubi, of pacts with Satan, of ghosts that expiate their
old offences in long-abandoned houses; absurd miracles of saints;
processions mingling with the dances of slaves; gaily decked temples
and parasitic rights which stifle the traditional faith, deprive the
Catholicism of Spain of its Semitic rigidity.

All through life the pious colonist is surrounded by marvels.  He
loves nature with an ingenuous faith, and attributes to the saints
and demons a continual intervention in his placid existence.  An
unexpected sound reveals the presence of a soul in torment; a tremor
of the earth, the divine wrath; sickness is a proof of diabolic
influence; health, of the efficacy of an amulet.  In the pharmacies
chimerical products may be purchased--condor's grease, unicorn's
horns, and the claws of the "great beast."

The monotonous hours are passed in devotions and futilities, prayers
and conventual disputes, long ceremonies and useless entertainments.
Sometimes the even course of life is interrupted by a startling feat
of prowess, or a festival, all gold and servility; the royal seals
have arrived, a princess is born in Spain, a treasure has been
discovered, a port has been sacked by audacious pirates, or sorcerers
or Portuguese Jews are to be burned in an imposing _autodafé_.  Then
the provincial cities, slowly threaded by sumptuous processions, are
all astir, but the dazzling vision is only ephemeral, and the grey
monotony returns, with its petty quarrels, its indolence, its
exaggerated rites.

The royal seals arrive under a _pallium_, and a luxuriously appointed
horse advances, bearing the treasure.  The spectators kneel before
the symbol of monarchical majesty, and incense, as at the feet of a
Byzantine ikon, expresses the adoration of {57} believers.  The
viceroy also enters beneath a canopy, passing in solemn procession
through the servile city, while the bells of a hundred churches
celebrate his advent, and a solemn cohort of _cabildantes_ in their
robes, monks of all orders, and bedizened doctors, praise with
courtier-like devotion the glory of the royal messenger.  In the
religious festivals the majestic altars which the devout, in token of
penitence, carry upon their shoulders, bear virgins clad in velvets
and glittering with jewels, or saints that bow to one another like
courtly hidalgos, or Christs that weep before the wondering crowd.
Around these gorgeous altars dance the slaves, and the monks chant a
melancholy anthem.  Seized by a sacred intoxication, men and women
scourge their bodies till they bleed.

The cry of anguish mingles with the monotony of the prayers, amidst
the tremulous excitement of the faithful.

The _autodafés_ were the supreme feast of blood.  The chronicles of
the time praise the "marvellous" spectacle.  The funeral procession
advanced towards the pyre, surrounded by burlesque and fanatical
groups.  Groaning monks hemmed in the sorcerers, the blasphemers, the
heretics; some bearing a yellow and others a green veil, and
lugubrious draperies on which were miniature paintings descriptive of
the infernal torments; others wore dunces' caps, which excited the
cruelty of the people.  As the victims proceeded to the pyre a crowd
thirsting for the sight and sound of martyrdom, drunken with the heat
of the sun, acclaimed the holocaust beneath the impassive tribune of
the Inquisitors.  Farce and grotesque invention mingled with tragedy,
Oriental luxury with a mystic terror; and the great lady who at night
would be dancing the pavane in her salon now devoutly sniffed the
acrid stench of charred flesh and blood.